children used to study here this school
for girls in derl Bella became a
makeshift field hospital and a shelter
during the
war Israeli military aircraft bummed it
twice killing dozens of
people this man narly
scaped destruction is everywhere me my
father and my daughters were outside for
treatment but we had just been right
here in this room God bestowed his Mercy
on us thank God my family is
okay others were not as
lucky derella is one of the most densely
populated areas in Gaza crammed with
despl
Palestinians ambulances took the wed to
the city's Al AA Hospital Israel says
its attack targeted Hamas command and
control center but doctors say most of
the victims are
civilians in fact most of the injured
are children and women who are in very
serious and critical condition many of
these injured women and children came
with amputated limbs Israeli troops have
destroyed more than 300 schools and
universities since October the
7th even those used as shelters by
families with nowhere else to go
everyone in the hospital is suffering
from critical injuries that are
receiving a treatment on the floor there
is a very clear surge of air strikes and
evacuation censors on these areas that
must be at least considered and
classified to be humanitarian safe
zones
alaz
paltin William Schamberg is head of the
international Committee of the Red Cross
in Gaza he joins us from Gaza City
Welcome to the program can you firstly
describe to us the reality of the
healthcare catastrophe that you've
witnessed in
Gaza good morning and thank you very
much for having me on the show um it's
difficult to find the words to
accurately describe the scenes that you
see in Gaza City and in the north the
healthc care sector has been
particularly
impacted uh by the hostilities which
have
devastated uh hospitals and Healthcare
facilities uh we were able to visit
Three uh different hospitals uh in the
past days and we saw there
that there are very few functional
facilities left within Gaza that there
were patients dealing with uh horrific
wounds and injuries as a result of the
hostilities the elderly uh many children
with amputations in very difficult
conditions and at the same time
hospitals themselves are overstretched
healthcare workers after months of of
conflict are exhausted and all the
facilities are running alarmingly low on
supplies and in addition to all of that
what can you say about the spread of
disease in such dire
conditions I mean just driving through
the streets uh particularly of uh the
north of the Gaza Strip the level of
Devastation and destruction is immense
uh whole neighborhoods have been reduced
to Rubble areas that used to provide
people with homes and schools are now
devoid of life and there's clear
problems when it comes to access to food
and sanitation including clean drinking
water all of these conditions are of
course not conducive to uh healthy
living and indeed uh risk just
compounding already very serious public
health issues uh that people are
starting to face when we spoke with
doctors uh and indeed with civilians
they were mentioning an increased
prevalence particularly in diarrhea in
Hepatitis A and of course we learned
recently that uh polio had been found in
samples of uh of water within the sewage
system within Gaza which is yet another
uh risk factor that really could just
push the healthcare system over the edge
what are you then as head of the
international Committee of the Red Cross
in Gaza calling for right
now civilians must be able to safely
Access healthcare healthcare workers
must be able to do their job the medical
supplies that are required to enable
these facilities to function must be
able uh to enter freely and uh
humanitarians should be able to have
unimpeded access in order to ensure that
civilians who so desperately require the
support that they need are able to
access it with our help even if there
were sufficient humanitarian supplies I
mean how challenging is it to get these
supplies to people in need with such a
smash
infrastructure of course uh there are
huge logistical issues uh there are big
challenges when it comes to of the
prevailing insecurity which uh
complicates the capacity for
humanitarian actors and and all
individuals to be able to move safely
given the conditions um more than
anything else what civilians lack today
is protection and and here it is the
responsibilities the parties of the
conflict under International
humanitarian law to ensure that
civilians are protected as our hospitals
healthcare workers and humanitarians so
that we can meet the acute and growing
needs this is of course horrendously
distressing I mean how do you feel just
as a human being to witness such
scenes the situation is heartbreaking
and it's gone on for too long to see uh
the levels of Destruction and
Desperation uh to know that it is going
to be extremely difficult for
communities to rebuild their shattered
lives and that despite all of this
people
continue however under the most
difficult of
circumstances is on a human level of
course extremely distressing but all the
more reason why we must do everything
that we can to limit the humanitarian
consequences of this horrendous
conflict William shanberg thank you very
much indeed for your thoughts here on
aler make sure to subscribe our channel
to get the latest news from aler